it's bits and qubits welcome to topcasts
for a bumper double episode I haven't
done this before but I'll be releasing
this podcast in two parts well of course
I often release multiple part podcasts
but if plans don't completely go astray
the first part will come out followed
very quickly within a few hours perhaps
at most a day by the second part what
I'm doing here is discussing primarily
the primary reason for doing this
particular episode is to discuss a paper
by David Deutsch called it from Cubit
but as I will explain it from qubit has
a bit of a history and one of the parts
of its history is entailed in the work
of John Wheeler physicist who inspired
David Deutsch David Deutsch says this
himself by the way wheeler wrote a paper
that I'll come to which promoted an idea
which came to be no known as it from bit
and so David's riffing on that saying
it's from qubit the podcast is in two
parts because originally when I was
putting this together I thought I'll
just do one big episode that's fine but
it became so large that there became a
natural dividing line between me
discussing the history of it from qubit
and the paper it from bit that's all in
part one which is what you're watching
now and discussing it from Cubit proper
perhaps you only want to listen to the
stuff that's about David Deutsch well
you might think you'll just jump to it
from qubit but believe me if you are a
fan of David Deutsch will want to hear a
lot of the content here in it from bit
because we talk about one of David's
intellectual Heroes and not only the
history of the author who is John
Wheeler but also I guess the
philosophical and in particular in
particular scientific motivation that
David Deutsch has in correcting what I
would say are errors in understanding
physics and indeed epistemology that
might be there in Wheeler's work and
there's a lot to respect in Wheeler's
work of course there is and as I've come
to deservingly is wheeler a hero of a
great many physicists so that's just the
introduction to the introduction for
today's episode today I'm going to be
discussing the fundamental nature of
reality in so far as we can know it or
can we Note have some physicists in the
past presume to know what the
fundamental nature of ontological final
reality is what does David deutschutt
say about this well he did write a paper
a paper that goes by the same name as
the title of this particular podcast it
from qubit but it has a historic lineage
an ancestor paper if you like and we're
going to be discussing both of those
today this paper by David Deutsch in
particular that I'm going to be focusing
on eventually
goes to the very limits of our knowledge
even to the limits of what is possible
to know in the very possibility of I
suppose knowing it all of having final
theories and he'll have some remarks to
say about those final theories towards
the end of his paper upon which I will
have some remarks but you regular
listeners well you know what we think
around these parts when it comes to the
open-ended stream of knowledge that's
implied here more than that required by
the optimistic view of people and
explanation creation so all of that
implies something about the possibility
of having these final theories all
wrapped up in a neat little package this
paper it from qbit was published in 2002
and so it predates the beginning of
infinity by nine years and it comes
about five years after the fabric of
reality here I guess and this is purely
a guess mind you I have not directly
talked to David Deutsche about this
particular issue it's reasonable to
assume David is getting down into the
technical weeds the basics of what is
known about physics in order to extract
out what the deepest messages for us in
terms of epistemology really are what
can be known
David's work in the beginning of
infinity and subsequently on exactly
this issue how there is no wall of
progress before us and how we can come
to know reality ever better even if we
can never hope to know reality directly
and once and for all does not come out
of nowhere that whole vision of reality
and knowledge doesn't come from nowhere
but nor is it an axiom it comes from
careful thought about the implications
of our best explanations but all of our
best explanations must be understood in
their own terms and the deepest
explanation we have of the physical
world is quantum theory well actually
that's only to a first approximation
because of course David was the one who
mathematically unified what was the
purely mathematical theory of
computation with the physics of quantum
theory and so properly considered
Quantum computation is the deepest
Theory we have as it entails both
quantum theory and computation and
because it entails computation it
entails epistemology and if it entails
epistemology it may even entire what
it's possible to know that we should do
which means it into house morality and
so Quantum computation encompasses quite
a lot and the fundamental unit of
quantum computation is the qubit and so
that is why we're going to see the qubit
plays this fundamental role in what we
know about the fundamental nature of
reality as we understand it and what
does Quantum computation that physical
Theory imply about physical reality and
our ability to know about it we get
answers to this in the beginning of
infinity we get answers to it in the
fabric of reality for that matter and we
will come back to that later but you
could also consult my series on chapter
9 quantum computers from the fabric of
reality for that so what this paper is
doing for a die-hard fan of David's work
like me is take what is there in the
fabric of reality and go even further
rarely have I been so excited to present
you with a paper of David's this is in
the same vein as the paper that I
discussed Once Upon a Time about David's
titled on the logic of experimental
tests and there I kind of extracted out
the more difficult physics parts of it
and to present the content that was
there for the non-physicists I'm doing
exactly the same here because it from QB
it is physics heavy in places and so
we're just going to extract out those
bits we're going to talk over the top of
them explain what we can't actually
distill out and focus on the
epistemological and Broad scientific and
perhaps even philosophical lessons that
are contained therein but before we get
there we need to talk about it from bit
it from bit is like the grandfather
paper of it's from qubit and it was
written by someone else altogether it
wasn't written by David Deutsch
this paper that I'm going to spend most
of the podcast discussing it from qubit
appears as a chapter in a book that book
is rather modestly titled science and
Ultimate Reality and it is edited by two
other intellectual Heroes of mine John
Barrow a physicist and cosmologist who
unfortunately passed away in September
of 2020 so relatively recently at only
67 a barrow won many big prizes in
physics and in science he won the
Templeton prize the direct prize the
Michael Faraday prize the direct meds
all among many others he was a hero of
mine because of the books he put out not
least of them the anthropic cosmological
principle that's the name of a book and
that is the big tome in work on the fine
tuning of the constants of nature which
of course I've concentrated on a fair
bit on top cast he wrote that book with
the great Frank tipler it really set the
stage for all future discussions on the
topic of the fine tuning of the contents
of Nature and well go back to my episode
on fine tuning from the beginning of
Infinity for all about at that and he
wrote another book on the same topic
simply called the constants of nature
later on as well as many others that I
haven't read unfortunately I should say
I disagree with almost all the
conclusions he draws but this is why I
find him an important thinker on these
topics he did not endorse for example
explanatory universality he possibly
didn't even know about it he did seem to
hint at strong evidence for a Creator
and thought there was Merit in
intelligent design seeing fine tuning
not merely of the physical constants but
also he saw fine tuning even in
chemistry but the point is he
articulated all of that very very well
so he was an editor of this book science
and Ultimate Reality alongside my other
great hero Paul Davies Professor Davies
is always hard to pin down on what he
really thinks about anything I don't
know if this is a vice or a virtue but
there it is does he think there is
design in the universe or just the
appearance of design is there are God
he's kind of cagey on all of that but
his books of course are something like
the gold standard I would say in Popular
Science in particular popular physics
and cosmology writing now remember I'm
I'm saying that because I do not regard
the beginning of infinity or the fabric
of reality as popular science but if you
force me to put them into that category
then I'll say they're the Platinum level
exemplars Paul Davies is I guess the
most prolific living author in that
field of popular physics and cosmology
books like John Barrow he's also won the
Templeton prize and the Faraday prize
and I think he's won many writing Awards
as well that tend not to get listed and
he is more professional bios Davies is
also that prized kind of science
Communicator that does not make big
claims that have no basis in reality
about things we cannot know he's not a
prophet and therefore he doesn't tend in
the direction of pessimism he's a clear
speaker and writer and just says how it
is and what it all might imply rather
than saying we're all definitely doomed
for reasons X Y and Z which is kind of
day regur and fashionable at the moment
to do my own theory is that this is all
part of British intellectual culture and
it's only when they let those people
over there on the other side of the
channel influence their thinking too
much of the academics at Oxford and
Cambridge and so on begin to go wrong
and it's just a gentle jibe don't cancel
me now so in this book and I'll say the
name a third time science and Ultimate
Reality these two authors Davies and
Barrow come together and apologies to
the third who well I would be
underselling things if I said I am less
familiar with him I don't know him at
all I had to look him up but he's a
another genuine physicist he's got a
closer to truth page and he adds
interest in everything from planetary
science through to Theology and once
worked for the Templeton Foundation and
so well there you go he leans heavily
into the Christian worldview okay now
why bother
beginning this podcast with any mention
indeed of these particular authors now
at some length well because we've got
big names as editors compiling a book
where the contributors literally are a
who's who of the physics World we've got
chapters in here by Freeman Dyas and
Bryce DeWitt Anton zelinger Andre Linde
Max tegmark Lee smolen and even the
theoretical biologist Stuart Kaufman
among others many others including of
course David Deutsch and what are all
these luminaries gathered together in
this particular book for to honor their
hero there's someone else yes the
physicists physicist John Wheeler now if
you don't know of John Wheeler than you
should in preparing this episode I
thought already that I had some
background on John Wheeler but I'd
really only just scratched the surface
this man had a truly astonishing life he
passed away in 2008 at age 96. he worked
alongside the likes of boar and Einstein
he co-authorized standard text I use for
a full year at University which was this
one SpaceTime physics still I think the
best introduction I know of to the field
with even some glimpses into gender
relativity it's mainly about special
relativity but never mind that he
co-authored the book on general
relativity simply titled gravitation
alongside Kip Thorne this book always
terrified me 1 300 pages of general
relativity it dwarfs other physics texts
I mean even huge undergraduate physics
texts which serve as an introduction to
multiple fields from classical mechanics
thermodynamics electromagnetism when
they're filled with text images
exercises example Solutions Etc they're
huge times but gravitation dwarfs them
all it's just one single part of physics
that it focuses on general relativity
even the Bible older New Testaments
together only has about 1 200 pages so
it's bigger than the Bible and the Bible
had multiple authors and was written
over the course of Millennia this was
the work of a couple of men over some
period of years absolutely epic why am I
going on about that because that
standard text wheeler in particular has
formed the basis of the education of
many of the big names in physics when it
comes to general relativity right so
he's an author and expert on general
relativity anything else not merely an
expert on general relativity he has been
credited with reigniting interest in
general relativity throughout the
entirety of the United States after
World War II he worked on both fission
and fusion solving key problems in the
Manhattan Project and also on hydrogen
bombs as well but really putting aside
all of his scientific accomplishments
lengthy as they are working on the
Manhattan Project developing the
hydrogen bomb okay both were big
collaborations he touched on many areas
of general relativity and quantum theory
including Quantum information Theory
consider his list of PhD students the
people he mentored I doubt anyone ever
can compete here let's go through just
some of the names Hugh Everett he
mentored Hugh Everett the guy who first
figured out the Multiverse Richard
Feynman Richard Feynman
I don't need to do anything else but
repeat his name Kip Thorne perhaps the
world's greatest expert on black holes
Jacob beckenstein of the beckenstein
bound and black holes have no hair Fame
and of course although David Deutsch was
not a PhD student of wheelers David does
credit wheeler as one of the two
physicists alongside Dennis Yama as
personally influencing him see this
article for more on that so that's
wheeler and this book is dedicated to
Wheeler and inspired by him all the
chapters are connected to the work of
John Wheeler that is the effect this man
has had on physics this is a channel
inspired by the work of David Deutsch
his own ideas and Associated ideas so
here I talk about popper and Feynman
Enlightenment figures ancient
philosophers and when they come up are
the physicists so here we have a
physicist who has himself personally
inspired David Deutsche so it's well
within the theme to talk about him right
now now in particular John Wheeler was
not only a highly accomplished physicist
who did physics there's some redundancy
for you he was a physicist who also went
deep into the implications of physics
for other fields in particular
epistemology and metaphysics though he
might not have used those terms exactly
and they don't appear to crop up in his
writings very often but before I get to
the point of today's episode which is to
discuss David's paper we have to discuss
at least part of that paper that
inspired David's paper that is the paper
by wheeler actually titled information
physics Quantum the search for links and
it was published in 1989 here it is and
it's in this paper that wheeler most
formally outlines what is known as his
it from bit thesis or doctrine the it
from bit claim he made in here inspires
at least four of the chapters in this
book alone and it's kind of law in the
culture of fundamental physics now
wheeler was the first to coin the phrase
it from beards and it has been used and
repurposed ever since so what's it all
about in overview well in my words it
refers to the physical world all the
it's that are out there from particles
to pear trees porcupines and planets and
bits from binary digit and that's about
information so in other words the
physical world arises out of information
that's what those three words mean it
from bit that's quite the claim that the
physical world comes out of information
and as I'll argue in a sense it's not
entirely originating with wheeler
because this idea that you get the
physical world out of information which
itself is not physical
goes back at least to Berkeley as far as
I know I'm passive into Plato it's it's
a form of idealism insofar as whether or
not wheeler things that information
itself is physical
which is something that David Deutsch
thinks is physical and we'll come to
that we'll see that distinction later on
I don't want to ruin too much of the
punchline here but where the Plato had
some idea like this or Bishop Berkeley
had some idea like this of course
wheeler is going to be far more
scientifically and mathematically
precise and we'll have a look at well
certainly one of his examples that try
to explain this perspective it from bit
means that information or the attempt to
find information determines what it's
there are not what it's a merely found
but in principle what is out there in
some sense this leads to a for him
particularly strong form of the
anthropic principle let's just go over
the anthropic principle for a moment
there are various formulations of it
some entirely uncontroversial and some
well listen for yourself firstly we've
got the whap
WIP
if you don't know why I'm laughing
well you can look up wapping Google or
perhaps not anyway
wab that's the weak anthropic principle
that's the form of the laws of physics
that's the form of the anthropic
principle that says the laws of physics
must be consistent with our existence
that's logic okay that's straightforward
basic logic that we exist so therefore
the laws of physics must be consistent
with our existence okay that's the
weekendthropic principle no one has any
objection to that it barely even
deserves to be called a principle it's
logic next we have the strong anthropic
principle the strong anthropic principle
says that the laws of physics have the
form they do so we will arise in the
universe or at least that life will the
laws don't just allow for life they are
set up or designed so that life arises
hmm now why would they have this form to
ensure that life or intelligence us
arise well that question is not answered
by the strong anthropic principle but it
seems to be an argument for intelligent
design or creationism something like
that a form of this strong anthropic
principle also called fap the final
anthropic principle is that life itself
determines the law of physics how would
that happen well near the end of time
life in the form of conscious
explanatory entities like ourselves want
to ensure their own existence so what
they do is they reach Back In Time by
some mechanism yet to be discovered and
affect the Big Bang so that conditions
are right so that the universe will
become bio-friendly so that they will
arise in the universe so that they can
reach back and change the laws of
physics such that the Horizon the
universe some people call this the
completely ridiculous anthropic
principle crap
and if you know what fat means if I pay
well fat might be even better than crap
anyway
Wheeler's not talking about those
specifically he's talking about
something else something called the
participatory universe or the
participatory anthropic principle the
idea here is that what information we
choose to seek out What observations we
make determine what physical stuff
happens or is out there and so this
determines the structure of the universe
us as observers determining what exists
out there in the universe The Observer
plays a deterministic role at the
foundations of physics long time
listeners to top cast will know my
thoughts about that but this is wheeler
so we can't dismiss wheeler in the same
way we can dismiss some Crystal wearing
healer claiming to use quantum harmonics
to find the resonant frequency of your
cancerous tumor wheeler has good reasons
for trying to explain the world in this
particular way I still think he is wrong
grounded in science though he is one of
the most knowledgeable people on physics
to have ever walked Planet grounded in
rationality and reason and well let's
just read what he has to say about this
and then I'll have some remarks on well
why I think he's wrong the abstract from
Wheeler's paper reads quote this report
reviews what quantum physics and
information Theory have to tell us about
the age-old question how come existence
No Escape is evident from four
conclusions one the world cannot be a
giant machine ruled by any
pre-established Continuum physical law
there is no such thing at the
microscopic level as space or time or
space-time Continuum three The Familiar
probability function or functional and
wave equation or functional wave
equation of standard quantum theory
provide mere Continuum idealizations and
by reason of this circumstance conceal
the information theoretic Source from
which they derive four no element in the
description of physics shows itself as
closer to primordial than the elementary
Quantum phenomenon that is the element
entry device intermediated Act of posing
as a yes no physical question and
eliciting an answer or in brief the
elementary Act of Observer participency
otherwise stated every physical quantity
every it derives its ultimate
significance from bits binary yes or no
indications a conclusion which we
epitomize in the phrase it from bit end
quote some big big claims are being made
there
there is no such thing at the
microscopic level as space or time or
space-time continuum
and this is the writer of the most
important text on general relativity
one of the greatest experts to have ever
lived on general relativity is saying
that space-time itself doesn't exist
at the microscopic level anyway
what do we say about that
he's looking at a future theory that is
quantum
that is going to show
that general relativity in some senses
quantized
he has one way of doing this in this
paper kind of it hints of it
but to presume it will happen is an
Article of Faith it's not science yet
but this paper is not a typical science
paper this paper skirts with metaphysics
and ultimate theories about the nature
of reality very well but what you can
also Gather By reading just the abstract
there is why David Deutsch would be
inspired by a man who wrote in this
style on these matters and I can readily
see why wheeler reaches these particular
conclusions because he seems to me to be
unconstrained by knowledge about
knowledge knowledge about people
knowledge about error and fallibility
and so on I'm not saying it's an
ignoramus I'm not saying he was unaware
of such things or perhaps he was I just
think that he had a different philosophy
and a different view which was mistaken
and led him into some mistaken
conclusions
this happens to the most brilliant
people in the world and he is proof
positive of this I would say I mean he
was aware
very much so of the many world's
interpretation but my feeling is those
more expert in this might want to
correct me on this but my feeling is
just listening to the man talk about it
he did not understand the many worlds
interpretation despite the fact he was
aware of it and he taught Everett but
you know you don't need to take my word
for it you can listen to the man in his
own words right here it's a YouTube
video of this
okay so let me let me just play this
here I'm always reticent to play things
like this these days because I get
copyright strikes even though you're
supposed to be able to comment on things
for fair use reasons you can have all
the lawyers in the world the problem is
YouTube automates copyright strikes and
there is no one at the other end of the
email when you send things and so the
problem is that me wanting to comment on
things like John Wheeler here you know
this is a important historic document
really me wanted to comment on this runs
the risk of my video being taken down
altogether but let's try let's try this
experiment so we're going to play what
wheeler himself says about his own
student whoever it's theory of the
Multiverse
I can recall whoever its thesis and how
I spent most of a night with him
going over trying to word it in a
concrete way
but
the ideas in the thesis
we're so
strange to many people
that they provoke strange
names
and particularly for dog produced a
strange name the many world
interpretation of quantum mechanics
and that's kind of a fair enough
criticism of course
you don't need to call this multiple
worlds and it does evoke in people a
misconception about what's going on this
idea of parallel realities
that don't interact but of course we
understand there is this thing called
interference and as David Deutsch says
of course this idea of multiple
realities or multiple worlds or
universes call them what you like
they're emergent parts of the more
fundamental thing the fundamental thing
being the Multiverse just physical
reality is what exists and you could
partition this up into groups
conveniently for whatever purpose you
might have into things that you call
universes or things that you call worlds
but even then it still leads people to
think well when you're talking about a
universe what are you talking about is
this whole thing that is you know 13.8 a
billion years old that has this
particular diameter and so on and so
forth but that's not quite true after
all all you need to do is an
interference experiment that is confined
within a black box somewhere like a
quantum computer and that constitutes a
Universe on this view this is why this
everettian way of looking at the quantum
theory is sometimes hampered by the
language itself but people just balk at
the idea and yet it is the simplest idea
and so Willa is right to say that it
gives rise to these strange this strange
terminology but then again
all interpretations so to speak of
quantum theory because quantum theory
itself
gives rise to some strange ideas
particle physics for that matter gives
rise to some strange terminology as does
astrophysics he invented the term black
hole
it's here to talk about strange words
all right let's keep going and listening
to Professor wheeler
a certain probability
that
such and such happens
and will be in a universe where we see
that happening
or there's a certain probability that
something else happens and will be in a
universe where we see that happening
well isn't that obvious
you could say
well
ever it's
mathematical formulation these
possibilities were coexisting
and could
come together and be extinguished
it was only
when what got to the point where one
headed irreversible Act of observation
that one of these became materialized
but that's not
um Everett's View
the act of observation is not the thing
that causes the materialization of
something that's the view that he is
refuting he's saying that collapse
doesn't happen
that's the whole point whether the
Observer is there or not once a Quantum
event happens once there is optionality
in the universe possibility for an
electron to go hither rather than
scissor or a photon or any other
fundamental object
then you have this differentiation I was
watching a thing by Sabine hosenfelder
earlier on about the many worlds
interpretation and she gets it wrong she
talks about splitting of the worlds
which always evokes this incorrect idea
what happens is differentiation
differentiation of
pre-existing class measure of fungible
instances of the universe into things
that are different and they can become
the same again during interference
phenomena that kind of thing
but what will is talking about here is
the active observation gets no special
dispensation
in Everett's eye view
in all other
non-equivalent visions of quantum theory
then the act of observation does have
this special physics it causes the
collapse of the wave function it causes
the other realities to disappear cause
it call it what you like it brings into
actual reality the thing which is
actually more in line with his deeper
metaphysics you know the the observation
somehow brings into reality this stuff
not whatever it thinks if it doesn't
think that observation plays this
pivotal role at all the Observer obeys
the same physics as everything else and
because of that because of that because
the Observer obeys the same laws of
physics as everything else in the
universe then if the universes are then
if the if physical reality
differentiates itself into two
possibilities one where the electron
goes left and one of the electron goes
right so too does the Observer now we
have this mystery of Consciousness okay
we are one Consciousness we're not
divided into two and so we can't
experience both at the same time which
by the way if you watch Sabine
hosenfelder's video on this she's
confused about as well she thinks that
we should somehow have conscious
experience of both things simultaneously
no we don't we don't understand
Consciousness we don't understand the
way in which Consciousness is related to
the Multiverse okay there are Mysteries
everywhere there are Mysteries all over
the place that are always open problems
but this particular problem is solved
this problem about what is the
measurement problem okay sometimes what
is the measurement problem what is the
observer effect or whatever you want to
call that the measurement problem is
solved there is no such measurement
problem when an observation when a
measurement is made when a Quantum event
happens physical reality differentiates
itself into the various options that
could possibly have happened and You
observe only one because you are an
observer you are not observers okay what
does a Wheeler go on to say if there is
anything
designed to confuse somebody
about what quantum mechanics is all
about
this does it
that's so unfair isn't it as if designed
to confuse and it's actually clarifying
I would love to be able to speak to him
you know and say that the only time I
was relieved of my confusion about
what's really going on in quantum
mechanics was to read about this very
Theory as explained by his own
intellectual descendant David Deutsch
his own intellectual grandson if you
like after all if um you know wheeler
taught Hugh Everett and whoever inspired
David Deutsch then you have this great
lineage this intellectual lineage and
far better for me to put myself anywhere
there but I learned from David Deutsch
what whoever was teaching the world
and it was the only thing that made
sense when it came to trying to
understand what was going on here was
not designed to confuse but quite the
opposite it was designed to clarify and
it is clarifying all other
ideas sound to me to be nonsense
[Laughter]
so yes that that there you go there's
wheeler on on Everett so that's what he
says he says about the Multiverse there
I think he gets the Multiverse wrong in
saying that you know um when you observe
it something exists but that's in fact
the opposite to what the Multiverse says
it says the Observer has no special
physics it doesn't the Observer doesn't
cause things to exist or not exist it's
just part of the physical system if
quantum things can happen and there are
observers there then The Observers
partition themselves among all the
possible things that could have been
observed whatever the case perhaps he
did understand quantum theory uh the
Multiverse I should say but his
Exposition there wasn't as good as it
could be and he had other cogent reasons
for rejecting the Multiverse but take
that as red I think that he didn't have
that good understanding of perhaps of
let's say conjectural knowledge and the
errors of empiricism and fallibalism and
foundationalism and so on for all the
misconceptions that a book like the
beginning of infinity would have cleared
up for him if only he had have lived
long enough to have read it you know the
the absolute best rest of us if we
didn't have the beginner Infinity would
readily slide into something like
Wheeler's Vision here so we should put
his ideas here as expressed in the
abstract right there on the pedestal it
deserves to be on which pedestal the
pedestal that is the Pinnacle of what
you will get out of an ultimate
conception of reality given quantum
theory and information without knowing
anything about anything that is in the
beginning of infinity
[Laughter]
for want of another way of expressing
this without knowing the requisite
epistemology vision of mathematics
understanding of physics
Etc you'll get possibly Wheeler's Vision
okay let's just go back you know to that
abstract look at look at number two
there there is no such thing as the
space-time Continuum as I say this is
the man who wrote the book on general
relativity who am I to quibble he thinks
that general relativity cannot be the
final theory of reality and of course I
agree but I don't think we can now make
any such Claim about the existence of
the Continuum or not but he does he says
that every physical quantity every it
derives its ultimate significance from
bits binary yes or no indications in
other words it from bit now we should
see a red flag there derives in what
sense is it derived how is it derived
from bit is it derivative logically via
some other form of Reason via the senses
some other physical effect
well we have to wait for David's update
it's from qubit that I'm going to read
in short order in order to explain at
least some of that by the way David's
obviously not going to say we derive it
physical reality in its entirety from
cubits he means something else and again
let's wait before giving the entire game
away now in the meantime let's go to
Wheeler's paper and pick out some of the
gems that are found therein because
there absolutely are gems to be found
here I mean you go mining and it can be
like that we mine this particular older
paper and we find gold and diamonds
there are gems but mines are dangerous
places they can collapse in on
themselves or you can fall into a great
void and pits and people can be lost
so you have to know when you've dug deep
enough and how to dig your way out again
as Sarah Man in The Lord of the Rings
said and what is awoken in the darkness
here and amongst all of these gems I
would say is a form of foundationalism
the idea you've reached the bottom and
Wheeler was searching for the foundation
the unalterable unchangeable foundation
and you have also another kind of bottom
if you think that you found that base
reality which is an end your own
progress which is a shame but this paper
by wheeler is about many things
it from bit is really just one part of
the broader whole the broader hole
includes three questions listed here
four no's and five Clues he says I'm
going to focus narrowly however just on
it from bit wheeler says there are three
examples which serve to illustrate his
idea of it from bit and I'm going to
ignore the first two they're about
photons and electrodynamics and what he
calls the Planck area which is mentioned
in the third but I'm going to skip over
those two and go just to the third one
because to my mind it's the more
interesting one and it's about something
that wheeler himself named and many
people may not know that this term is
due to him and that term is black hole
Yeah he coined the word black hole now
of course there were no doubt all sorts
of holes in history many of them people
dug in their own Gardens and perhaps
when they looked into them they
described them as black so it probably
wasn't the first person to use the
phrase black hole but what we mean is of
course the cosmological object the thing
who's Event Horizon around a singularity
is known as a black hole wheeler coined
the term for that object so what does he
say about it from bit and black hole
well let's just read him and recall that
beckenstein and Thorne two names that
we're going to hear in this little
passage here were among many of
Wheeler's PhD students wheeler says
quote as third and final example of it
from bits we recall the wonderful
Quantum finding of beckenstein totally
unexpected denouement of earlier
classical work of Penrose Christa dulu
and rafini refined by Hawking that the
surface area of the Horizon of a black
hole rotating or not measures the
entropy of the black hole thus the
surface area partitioned in imagination
into domains each of size 4 h-bar log 2
that is 2.77 times the plank area yields
the beckenstein number n and the
beckenstein number so thorn and Zurich
explain tells us the number of binary
digits the number of bits that would be
required to specify in all detail the
configuration of the constituents out of
which the black hole was put together
entropy is a measure of lost information
to no community of newborn outside
observers can the black hole be made to
reveal out of which particular one of
two to the power of n configurations it
was put together its size and it is
fixed by the number n of bits of
information hidden within it the quantum
h-bar in whatever correct physics
formula it appears thus serves as a lamp
it lets us see the Horizon area as
information lost understand wave number
of lightless photon momentum and think
of field flux as bit registered Fringe
shift end quote
it's wonderfully eloquent and Powerful
passage there about the purpose of
Planck's constant what it can do sort of
poetic explanation of entropy there and
black holes all tied up together
Planck's constant h-bar reduced Planck's
constant I should say is often quoted in
Joule seconds it's a curious thing to
think about physically what's the
physical meaning of this thing it's kind
of like the size of the step that you
take between quanta set in the universe
so it's the it's the size of how much
you go up each time you want to increase
the amount of energy of some system it
goes up in multiples of planes constant
so from one energy level around a
nucleus and another energy level that's
in multiples of planks constant or
equivalently photons are emitted from
atoms which is basically to say they
come in individual types with energies
of multiples of planes constant Planck's
constant in standard units is
6.62607015 times 10 to the power of
minus 34 Joule seconds or joules per
Hertz a a per Hertz or inverse Hertz is
a second but don't worry about all that
notice the fact that minus 34 10 to the
power of minus 34 is a small number
which is why Quantum effects are not
readily noticeable around us we live in
a world of emergent Simplicity which is
classical to some approximation but
technically always actually really
Quantum but you need to begin
approaching that 10 to the power of
minus 34 scale before you know
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
begins to make a difference to how you
specify saying where something is or how
fast something is going and it's only
down at those levels where it really
makes a difference the fact that you
can't just go up and down in quantities
of energy by any arbitrary amount it's
in amounts of 6.626 times 10 to the
power of minus 34 Joule seconds
multiplied by the frequency of your
Photon so if your photon is 100 Hertz
that's a low frequency by the way you
know that's a radio wave then your
energy is 6.626 times 10 to the power of
minus 32 joules let's not do any more
calculations for now let's just accept
that this Planck number this Planck's
constant I should say exists so we have
this number which sets for us the size
of the discrete jumps in the universe in
our universe that are possible to make
when moving from one amount of a thing
to another in particular energy in this
particular case as we're using this
example you can't have any amount of
energy that you like the energy comes in
bundles usually called photons and yeah
they occur in these discrete steps
multiples of Planck's constant that's
the quantum and what he says about there
with regards to entropy is nice don't
you think attributes a measure of lost
information he says so I guess this is
also where wheeler is getting his idea
of rejecting the Continuum in other
words in the specific case of the
surface of a black hole but also this is
more broadly to do with any amount of
entropy any which is any region of space
it's really not just a black hole but
he's talking about a black Colony its
area specifies its entropy so that it
can be imagined to be partitioned into
domains as shown in this Pidgey which
specify the constituents out of which
the black hole was made
so reality in that sense at the surface
of a black hole Can Be Imagined to be
information this is also got something
to do with this holographic principle
and now see that movie Interstellar for
more about that I suppose that uh one of
the writers certainly one of the expert
advisors to that movie was Kip Thorne
one of the greatest experts in black
holes of all time and student of John
Wheeler which is why some of us really
like that movie so much it has it also
had one of the most accurate portrayals
of a black hole ever featured on film
this picture here says symbolic
representation of the telephone number
of the particular one of the to the
power of inconceivable but by now
indistinguishable configurations out of
which this particular black hole of
beckons sign number n and Horizon area
for nhbar log 2 was put together symbol
also in a broader sense of the theme
that every physical entity every it
derives from bits well there we go now
for me personally I don't know why this
particular result profound as it is
generalizes to everything else
everywhere in existence for all time the
beckenstein bound so called is about the
entropy in any fixed region of space
okay but that from that fact
existence becomes nothing but
information on this basis is quite the
stretch or rather that all physics
reduces to information and there's no
physical stuff left it's all just
information if that is the implication
that seems a stretch the very notion
that you know matter isn't matter that
it's information uh at bottom I think
that matters
David will go into this when we get to
his paper that we're coming to him
anyways when wheeler does say imagine
uses the word imagine there it's rather
telling imagine that the surface
contains information in the form of
zeros and ones imagine yes
well let's move on from here to later in
the paper because wheeler writes more
about his nose and his questions uh
we're skipping all of that because I
just want to go to the it from bit stuff
so wheeler goes on to say quote uh just
let me just reread what he did say and
then we'll go on he's just said quote
the quantum h-bar Planck's constant in
whatever correct physics form the root
appears thus serves as lamp it lets us
see Horizon area as information lost
understand wave number of light as
Photon momentum and think of field flux
as bit registered fringes shift giving
us its as bits the quantum presents us
with physics as information how come a
value for the quantum so small as H bar
equals 2.612 times 10 to the power of
minus 66 centimeters squared opposing
the Mr reflection so uh uh yeah he's
using different units to what I use as
standard units I you know I stick with
meters and seconds he's got centimeters
going on here okay fine and he goes on
quote as well as ask why the speed of
light is so great as C equals three
times ten to the power of 10 centimeters
per second no such constant as the speed
of light ever makes an appearance in a
truly fundamental account a special
relativity or Einstein geometro Dynamics
and for a simple reason time and space
are both tools to measure interval we
only then properly conceive them when we
measure them in the same units the
numerical value of the ratio between the
second and the centimeter totally lacks
teaching power it is an historical
accident its occurrence in equations
obscured for decades one of Nature's
great simplicities likewise with hbar
every equation that contains an h-bar
floats a banner it's from bits the
formula displays a piece of physics that
we have learned to translate into
information theoretic terms to tomorrow
we will have learned to understand and
express all of physics in the language
of information at that point we will
revalue H bar equals 2.612 times 10 to
the power of minus 66 centimeters
squared as we downgrade C equals 3 times
10 to the power 10 centimeters per
second today from constant of nature to
artifact of history and from Foundation
of Truth to enemy of understanding end
quote okay so big claims there and
something I think that is quite
technical in places time and space are
both tools to measure interval he says
there then the key point we only
properly conceive them when we measure
them in the same units okay so what's
this about this takes some technical
physics to try and understand what
wheeler is saying here so I'm going to
take two senses that's a better idea
would have been to asks some proper
physicists but the point is here with my
channel is that I am trying to explain
technical physics Concepts to the
layperson I'm trying to be the conduit
so if I don't get this stuff then the
person is clearly not writing for
someone with undergraduate or Master's
level physics knowledge writing for
someone who's got the PHD and above
Professor level physics knowledge so
this is where I'm being pushed okay I
think I have a good understanding of
special relativity I think I have a
basic understanding of general
relativity and this is of course
the greatest expert possibly who's ever
lived in general relativity explaining
aspects of general relativity so as I
have said who am I to question what's
going on here but what I take away from
this here
is something that just comes straight
out of special relativity really called
the space-time interval is that space
and time are not fundamental that's what
general relativity that's what special
relativity are telling us that if you
move through space your measurements of
clocks externally to your frame of
reference change which means literally
time slows down if you're moving through
space and similarly if you're moving
through space then other spaces outside
appear to be length contracted so we say
space and time are intimately tied
together into this one unified
fundamental thing space-time so we
measure
space and time space time either in
units of seconds or meters these are
interchangeable in relativity
it just depends on what you're doing for
example a photon gets everywhere
absolutely everywhere and I know this is
hard to accept you just have to you just
have to apply the equation but it's
simply a fact of the matter a photon in
its frame in its frame gets everywhere
instantly photons travel at the speed of
light and when you travel at the speed
of light all lengths appear contracted
to zero to you time appears not to pass
at all you just get from here to there
instantly no matter where you're going
from one side of the galaxy to the other
now of course if you're watching this
Photon go from one side of the galaxy to
the other you see that it takes 120 000
years whatever you know the diameter of
the the Galaxy happens to be these are
hard things to get your head around and
this is why relativity is called
relativity because because moving
objects appear to have their time moving
slowly moving clocks appear to tick
slowly is what we say time appears to be
relative space appears to be relative
hence this term relativity it appears as
though nothing is constant well okay the
speed of line is constant and the
space-time interval is constant as well
okay the space-time interval which is a
a more complex thing than either simply
the space and the time okay the distance
in space time that is constant for all
observers all the time when something is
moving but I'm quickly getting into the
weeds of special relativity and we don't
want to turn this into a lesson on
special relativity
but what I find here with what wheeler
is saying is that on the one hand he's
just saying right there look space and
time kind of don't even exist in some
sense there's a deeper thing now just
because there's this deeper thing called
space time doesn't mean the emergent
thing doesn't exist is the first thing I
would say about that you can come to a
deeper understanding of it space and
time can still have their emergent
existence but all right let's go with
wheeler and just say the best
explanation there's a good comport with
what Deutsch says about what it means
for something to exist at all is that
does the thing feature in our best
explanations of reality okay well
space-time features in the the the
explanation of reality that is general
relativity so it exists by that measure
that's the deeper things space time we
have that explanation general relativity
special relativity that says that
space-time exists okay but then again on
the other hand wheeler has the whole
I'll put one of the whole purposes of
this paper the thesis that he's putting
forward is to deny even the existence of
space-time so never mind just space and
just time which he's denying have
reality he's saying even space time
doesn't have reality because space time
is merely an it after all he wants to
say it's all actually bits even
space-time he wants to eliminate the
speed of light and Planck's constant
from fundamental physics saying they are
a kind of artifact and well this is
where the the this idea of natural units
comes in which physicists use all the
time rather than say the speed of light
is you know 299 million 792 458 meters
per second which is what it is you can
just set it in your equations as C
equals one well why not you know you can
call that speed which is a constant you
can call it what you like so set it as
one and then it's sort of effectively
kind of disappears from your equations
wherever it appears wherever that
constant appears it's now just the
number one these are called natural
units and you can do the same with you
know Planck's constant H just set it to
the value of one and it appears that
they disappear the particular value that
you had this complicated number 299 792
458 meters per second is an artifact of
History if you like that's what he's
referring to and it doesn't need to
appear there but I don't know why this
arbitrary setting of units for
convenience which is the way in which we
measure a thing should imply much about
the thing itself but wheeler does take
that step that a unit of measurement
becomes suddenly a fundamental part of
reality and for him it means you're
getting the it's from the bits that
seems like assertion to me but I think I
must understand him he's wheeler and who
am I after all
I agree though with his final sentiments
there that making a big deal of what
numbers we express these constants in
whether it's centimeters a second or
meters a second or miles per hour or
whatever for light speed like I say
that's an artifact of History you can
just call it one but he's deeper Point
escapes me that any of that is
physically significant let alone
ontologically or metaphysically
significant you know it tells us
something deep about the ultimate nature
of reality rather than just something
about the theory that we're using to
explain reality and how we can change
the units for the purpose of convenience
and for teaching as he says there okay
moving on let's see what comes next
skipping bits and pieces here he writes
quote from wheeler fourth clue
Consciousness I remember he's got all
these these Clues as well so he writes
here consciousness
we have traveled what may seem a
dizzying path first Elementary Quantum
phenomenon brought to a close by an
irreversible Act of amplification second
the resulting information expressed in
the form of bits third this information
may be used by Observer participants via
communication to establish meaning
fourth from the past through the
bileniums to come many Observer
participants so many bits so much
exchange of information as to build what
we call existence
pausing their my reflection
The Observer participants people by
exchanging information build what we
call existence now on the one hand
this is like uh comports with what David
Deutsch says you know off into the
distant future should we survive and
continue explaining the world creating
knowledge then we come to control
reality
this is only possible not necessary he
seems to be saying it's necessary here
and moreover that it's not so much
knowledge knowledge doesn't appear to
make an appearance but rather this
exchange of information which is really
about just observing stuff Observer
participants okay let's keep going it
goes on to say quote next paragraph
doesn't this it from bit view of
existence seek to elucidate the physical
world about which we know something in
terms of an entity about which we know
almost nothing consciousness
and doesn't Mari Curie tell us physics
deals with things not people end quote
from Curie using such and such equipment
making such and such a measurement I get
such and such a number who I am has
nothing to do with this finding or does
it am I sleepwalking or am I one of
those poor souls without the critical
power to save himself from pathological
Science Under such circumstances any
claim to have measured something Falls
flat until it can be checked out with
one's fellows checked how Morton white
reminds us how the community applies its
tests of credibility and in this
connection quotes analyzes by Chauncey
Wright Josiah rice and Charles Saunders
Pierce parmanidis of Ilia 515 BC to 450
BC May tell us that quote what is is
identical with the thought that
recognizes it end quote we however steer
clear of the issues connected with
Consciousness the line between the
unconscious and the conscious big begins
to fade in our day as computers evolve
and develop as mathematics has level
upon level of logical structure we may
someday have to enlarge the scope of
what we mean by our who this granted we
continue to accept as a central part of
the concept of it from bit for lesdale's
guideline quote meaning is the joint
product of all the evidence that is
available to those who communicate end
quote what shall we say of a view of
existence that appears if not
anthropomorphic in its use of the word
who still overly centered on life and
Consciousness it would seem more
reasonable to dismiss for the present
the semantic overtones of who and
explore and exploit the insights to be
won from phrases communication and
communication employed to establish
meaning end quote well he's quite
prescient there you know talking about
computers and how we might need to
enlarge the scope of what we mean by who
yes artificial general intelligence
there but there's so much there there's
so much in that power graph there that I
find a mix of both the sensible and
Italians or a dance with a relative
that's kind of poetry
you know especially that stuff there
about the the line between the
unconscious and the conscious begins to
fade
that's unclei to me he talks about
computers evolving so you know as if
just by
gradual increase in complexity suddenly
you get Consciousness in some way so
that kind of what I would say is a Trope
not back in these days but these days it
would be back in those days when wheeler
wrote this certainly not a trip that
would have been a kind of a new idea but
now
now certainly a trip uh the the the
increased complexity means
higher likelihood of intelligence
something like that let's go to the
conclusion that wheeler rights here
conclusion quote the space-time
Continuum question mark
even Continuum existence itself question
mark except as idealization neither the
one entity nor the other can make any
claim to be a primordial category in the
description of nature it is wrong
moreover to regard this or that physical
quantity is sitting out of there with
this or that numerical value in default
of question asked an answer obtained by
way of appropriate observing device the
information thus solicited makes physics
and comes in bits the count of bits
drowned in the Dark Knight of a black
hole displays itself as a horizon area
expressed in the language of beckenstein
Number the bit count of the cosmos
however it is figured is 10 Rays to a
very large power so also is the number
of Elementary acts of Observer
participency over time of the order of
50 billion years and except via those
time leaping Quantum phenomena that we
rate as Elementary acts of Observer
participency no way has ever offered
itself to construct what we call reality
that's why we take seriously the theme
of it from bit end quote
wonderful so my reflection on that uh in
part
um is this is one of
certainly in his day the greatest expert
on general relativity I would say
possibly exceeded by his own student
keepathon later and of course you know
people continue to learn more and more
today but
of all time you know John Wheeler one of
the greatest ever expositors and
developers of general relativity
relatively broadly now if you're in that
position you are one of the greatest
ever then you want to go beyond
and so I can readily imagine that you
know because general relativity regards
the Continuum is fundamental space-time
as being a fundamental part of reality
that's the fundamental thing that
general relativity is trying to explain
the space-time Continuum that in some
sense wheeler is biased being an expert
in that area he wants to go beyond it
and say it's not fundamental in any
final sense now I agree that it can't be
fundamental in any final sense
but it is fundamental as far as We Know
should we expect it to be quantized in
the future
I don't know I don't know if we should
expect that or not I don't know what
comes next
Perhaps it is another theory containing
a Continuum well perhaps if it does get
quantized then a successor to that
theory the successor to the successor of
general relativity becomes a Continuum
again who knows what goes on with
our deepening understanding of physical
reality but there's a bias inherent here
the bias is that it simply must be the
case that the space-time Continuum is
succeeded by information which is the
final ultimate theory of reality in some
way
all about that black hole beckenstein
number example that he talked about
earlier something comes after the
conclusion in this paper by the way the
acknowledgments and whose name should
appear there well of course among many
great luminaries is David Deutsch
himself David Deutsch acknowledged as an
inspiration here for wheeler as wheeler
was an inspiration to Deutsch so this is
very nice isn't it
but now finally we get to the meat of
the matter finally it is time to discuss
it from cubits so let's call that part
one it from bit and simultaneously I'll
publish these two episodes together I'll
just split them up so that you're not
forced to listen All in One go we'll
have the second episode it from Cubit so
that's up next
[Music]
la la